Title: A Manifesto of the perfect To-Do List Application
Date: 2018-09-05 11:00
Tags: Application, To-Do List
Slug: manifesto-perfect-to-do-list
Authors: Pietro Bongiovanni
Summary: When looking for a new tool, you should list what are your requirements. This is my Manifesto of what a perfect to-do list application does and what it does not.
Status: published

I’ve been using Todoist for about two years now. I have always been happy with it but I recently came to the realization that being happy with something is not a compelling enough reason to see whether there are ways in which said process can be improved. This, combined with thinking that I could achieve way more with my planning and to do lists if I managed them in a different way, made me start the search for a new “daily driver" application.

I decided to tackle this problem in a very specific way: I will be trying one application every two weeks, from zero to hero: I will start with an empty list, import all my to-do’s and projects during a weekend and I will be using it to run my life for the following two weeks. I am still going to keep a “master” to-do list in Todoist because that’s where I already have all my projects and deadline stored so Todoist will always be my starting point.

This first post is not yet a review, but rather a sort of “Manifesto” of what my perfect to-do list application does and how it does it. All this should, of course, be taken with a grain of salt: what is perfect for me might be abysmal for you so you should think very carefully about what you want your application of choice to do.

This post is nothing but that: I sat down one day brainstorming what I want my application to work, I made a list of must-have features, some nice to have, and some “Don’t Care” features, I wrote them all on my piece of paper and ranked them by how much I value them. I came up with this list to which I keep coming back to in order to rate the “performance” of each application.

Let’s go through my requirements and analyze them in detail one by one.

## Must Haves
My main computer, right now, is a MacBook Pro, hence I need my choice to have a native MacOs application that works offline. I like to unplug every now and then so having a web app for me is not enough as I want to be able to view, add, edit and delete to do’s even when I am not connected to the internet. I also want a companion iOs app to use on my iPhone/iPad on the go, whenever I have a quick to-do to add to the list and I don’t have access to my laptop. Obviously syncing between the two is fundamental.
Every weekend I perform a weekly review followed up by a weekly planning for the following week: having a “done” view, which lets me easily see which to-dos I completed the past week and which day I completed them is something which I highly value and need in my application of choice, together with the ability to create “smart filters” which allow me to have a glance on what I planned for the current week, even without having set a specific due date, at any time.
Finally, I use my to-do lists in a very specific way: I have main “areas” of focus (school, work, personal and miscellaneous) which should be divided from each other, inside each area I have “sub-projects” (single classes, freelance work, and full-time job, as well as several others for each) so I need nesting of projects as well as of single tasks.

These are the things I can’t live without: if an application does not give one of the above either out of the box or with some slight tweaking (of the application or the process), I will not consider it as a possible daily driver.

## Nice To Have
All the following features are not absolutely necessary but give extra points to one application if ever I am unsure between two different ones.
My home desktop runs Linux so I would need a native Linux application to go with the MacOS and the iOS one, although I would be happy enough with a web app as I never unplug my desktop from the network. I am also planning to get the new Apple Watch when it comes out so having my to-do lists on my watch when I am out and about (for example, getting groceries) would be very nice.
Most MacOS native applications offer a notification shade widget: I have grown to really like these widgets lately so if an application offers one, they are a big plus, but it is not that big of a deal if it is not available.
I have my to-do list open 24/7 on my computer so a reminder feature is not totally necessary, but sometimes it is very handy as I often lose track of time when working or studying.
Finally, I am a bit of a sucker for statistics, so if the application offers built-in statistics features, like how many tasks where completed each day, at what time the task lists got emptied etcetera it would gain many points in my eyes, but given that I set the “done" view as a must have, I can analyze the statistics by myself by looking at said view and a spreadsheet.

## Do Not Care
Finally, by looking around some of the most common applications, I saw that many offer features I do not really care about so it is not important whether or not they are present in my application. I do not use browser extensions, ever, so having one would not improve the application for me, just like I do not use voice assistants for these tasks, hence I do not need any Alexa/Google Assistant/Siri integrations. Many applications offer task notes and uploading task-related files. All my notes are always in Evernote (where I perform my weekly planning) so if I ever need to find something I can always find it there. Some applications offer built-in Pomodoro timers with tasks or time tracking: I track all my time at a layer higher than single tasks using Toggl and I use different applications for Pomodoro timers depending on the device I am currently using so I am not interested in any of these features. Finally, some applications offer calendar integrations and location-based reminders/task lists, neither of these is interesting to me as I would much rather be able to create my custom lists using some sort of filtering.

One final word should be spent on pricing: I am more than willing to pay for an application that improves my life, so I am not looking around for free options only, however I am not a fan of subscription models (not for everything, at least) so if the choice comes down to an application with a subscription model and one with a one time cost, I will probably lean more towards the latter. But that decision will have to wait until the search is complete.